# Math4303 Modern Algebra (Lecture 32)

## Rings

### Ideals

Let $R$ be a commutative ring.

$S\subseteq R$ is a subring if

- $(S,+)\leq (R,+)$
- $a,b\in S$, then $ab\in S$.

So $(S,+,\cdot)$ is a subring of $R$.

<details>
<summary>Example</summary>

$(\mathbb{Z},+,\cdot)$ is a subring of $(\mathbb{R},+,\cdot)$.

</details>

#### Definition of ideal

A subset $I\subset R$ is an ideal if

- $(I,+)\leq (R,+)$
- if $a\in I,b\in R$, then $ab\in I$. (Trivially $I$ is a subring of $R$, but take $b\in R$ to $I$ if multiply with $a\in I$.)

<details>
<summary>Example</summary>

$(\mathbb{Z},+,\cdot)$ is not an ideal of $(\mathbb{R},+,\cdot)$.

$1\in \mathbb Z$, $\sqrt{2}\in \mathbb R$, $\sqrt{2}\notin \mathbb Z$.

---

$(\{0\},+,\cdot)$ is an ideal of $(\mathbb{R},+,\cdot)$.

---

For any non zero element, if $I$ is an ideal and $a\neq 0,a\in I$, then $a^{-1}\in I$, so $1\in I$.

For every $b\in \mathbb{R}$, $b\in I$ since $b\cdot 1\in I$.

Therefore, there are only two idals of $(\mathbb{R},+,\cdot)$: $(\{0\},+,\cdot)$ and $(\mathbb{R},+,\cdot)$.

---

More generally, every ring with unity and $I$ is an ideal of $R$ which contains a unit, then $1\in I$, so $I=R$.

---

In particular, if $R$ is a field, then $R$ has only two ideals: $(\{0\},+,\cdot)$ and $R$ itself.

---

Let $R$ be the ring of functions $f:\mathbb{R}\to \mathbb{R}$. with

$$
(f+g)(x)=f(x)+g(x),\quad (fg)(x)=f(x)g(x)
$$

Then $I=\{f\in R|f(2)=0\}$ is an ideal of $R$.

---

What are all ideals of $\mathbb{Z}$?

$n\mathbb{Z}$ is an ideal of $\mathbb{Z}$. ($n\geq 0$).

clearly $n\mathbb{Z}$ is an ideal and if $I\subseteq \mathbb{Z}$, then $(I,+)$ is a subgroup of $(\mathbb{Z},+)$. (Cyclic, therefore $I$ must be generated by some element. $\langle n\rangle=n\mathbb{Z}$.)

---

If $f:R\to S$ where $R$ is a commutative ring, $f$ is a ring homomorphism.

Then $\ker(f)$ is an ideal of $R$.

$\ker(f)=\{a\in R|f(a)=0\}$.

Suppose $a\in\ker(f)$ and $b\in R$, then $f(ab)=f(a)f(b)=f(a)0=f(0)=0$. Therefore $ab\in \ker(f)$.

</details>

### Factor ring (Quotient ring)

Suppose $R$ is commutative and $I\subseteq R$ is an ideal.

Then $R/I$ is a set of cosets of $I$ in $R$: $a+I$ for $a\in R$.

This is an abelian group with operation 

$$
(a+I)+(b+I)=(a+b)+I
$$

$R/I$ has also a multiplication operation:

$$
(a+I)(b+I)=ab+I
$$

<details>
<summary>This is well defined</summary>

Addition is trivial.

Suppose $a+I=a'+I$, $b+I=b'+I$, we need to show that $ab+I=a'b'+I$.

Since $a+I=a'+I$, $a-a'\in I$, and $b+I=b'+I$, $b-b'\in I$. So $b(a-a')\in I$, $a'(b-b')\in I$, (since $I$ is an ideal). So $b(a-a')+a'(b-b')=ab-a'b'\in I$, so $ab+I=a'b'+I$.

So $R/I$ is a ring.

</details>

#### Fundamental Theorem of ring homomorphisms

Let $R$ be a commutative ring and $f:R\to S$ be a ring homomorphism.

Then $R/\ker(f)\simeq \operatorname{Im}(f)$

> [!WARNING]
>
> $\operatorname{Im}(f)$ is a subring of $S$ but not necessarily an ideal.
>
> Consider $f:\mathbb Z\to \mathbb R$ $f(a)=a$, $\mathbb Z$ is not an ideal of $\mathbb R$.

The proof should be similar to the proof of the Fundamental Theorem of group homomorphisms, so we skip this part.

<details>
<summary>Example</summary>

$\mathbb{Z}\to \mathbb{Z}_n$ by $a\mapsto [a]$. This a ring homomorphism. $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}\simeq \mathbb{Z}_n$ as rings.

</details>

#### Definition of Maximal Ideals

Assume $R$ is a commutative ring with a unity.

If $I\subseteq R$ is an ideal, then $R/I$ is also a commutative ring with a unity ($1+I$).

$$
(a+I)\cdot (b+I)=(ab)+I=(ba)+I=(b+I)\cdot (a+I)
$$

An ideal $M\subsetneq R$ is called a maximal ideal if $M\subseteq I\subseteq R$ for ideal $I$ in $R$ implies $I=M$ or $I=R$.

<details>
<summary>Example</summary>

The maximal ideal of $\mathbb{Z}$.

$n\mathbb{Z}\subset m\mathbb{Z}\iff n\in m\mathbb \iff m|n$.

So $n\mathbb{Z}=m\mathbb{Z}\iff m=\pm n$.

So if $p|n$ then $n\mathbb{Z}\subseteq p\mathbb{Z}$.

If $n>0$ $p\neq n$ then $n\mathbb{Z}\subsetneq p\mathbb{Z}$.

Therefore $p\mathbb{Z}$ is the maximal ideal of $\mathbb{Z}$, where $p$ is a prime number.
</details>

#### Theorem of maximal ideals

$M\subsetneq R$ is a maximal ideal if and only if $R/M$ is a field.

> Proof next lecture.
