# Math4302 Modern Algebra (Lecture 34)

## Rings

### Maximal Ideals

Assume that $R$ is a commutative ring with unity.

$M\subsetneq R$is maximal if $M\subseteq I\subseteq R$ for ideal $I$ in $R$ implies $I=M$ or $I=R$.

#### Theorem for Maximal Ideals induces a Field

$I\subsetneq R$ is an ideal, and $R/I$ is a field if and only if $I$ is a maximal ideal.

<details>

<summary>Proof</summary>

$\impliedby$: Proved last time.

$\implies$: If $I\subsetneq J\subseteq R$, where $J$ is an ideal.

Then we pick $a\in J$, $a\notin I$. We have $a+I\neq I$.

So $a+I$ is non-zero element in $R/I$, so it has a multiplicative inverse $b+I$: $(a+I)(b+I)=1+I$.

So $ab+I=1+I$, so $ab-1\in I\subset J$, so $1=ab-i\in J$, since $a\in J$, and $i\in J$.

So $J=R$.

</details>

Recall if $F$ is a field, every ideal in $F[x]$ is principal (can be generated by some $(f(x))$), and if $I=(f(x))=\{f(x)g(x)|g(x)\in F[x]\}$, then $I$ is maximal if and only if $f(x)$ is irreducible.

#### Definition of Prime Ideals

Let $R$ be a commutative ring with unity. An ideal $I\subsetneq R$ is called prime if $ab\in I$ implies $a\in I$ or $b\in I$.

<details>
<summary>Example</summary>

$n\mathbb{Z}$ is a prime ideal if and only if $n$ is prime.

$n\mathbb{Z}$ prime when $n|ab$ implies $n|a$ or $n|b$.

</details>

#### Theorem for Prime Ideals induces Integral Domain

$I\subset R$ is an ideal $R/I$ is an integral domain if and only if $I$ is a prime ideal.

<details>
<summary>Proof</summary>

$(a+I)(b+I)=0+I$ if and only if $a+I=I$ or $b+I=I$.

$\implies$: If $ab\in I$, then $ab+I=0+I$, so $(a+I)(b+I)=I$, which is the zero element in $R/I$.

Since $R/I$ is an integral domain, $(a+I)(b+I)=0+I$ implies $a+I=I$ or $b+I=I$.

$\impliedby$: If $(a+I)(b+I)=0+I$, then $ab\in I$, so $a\i nI$ or $b\in I$ (by definition of ideal), so $a+I=I$ or $b+I=I$.

</details>

#### Corollary: Maximal Ideals are Prime Ideals

Every maximal ideal is a prime ideal.

<details>
<summary>Proof</summary>

Field is an integral domain, so every maximal ideal is a prime ideal.

</details>

But not the that the converse is false.

<details>
<summary>Example of prime ideal that is not maximal</summary>

In $\mathbb{Z}[x]$, we saw $M=\{f(x)\mid \text{constant term is even}\}$ is an ideal.

Let $I=\{f(x)\mid \text{constant term is 0}\}$.

Note that $I\subsetneq M$ (Therefore $I$ is not maximal), and $I$ is an ideal. 

And note that $I$ is also a prime ideal (if any of the coefficients is 0, then the constant term is 0).

</details>

> In general, prime ideal is a weaker condition than maximal ideal.

### Field extensions

[We got this in linear codes!](https://notenextra.trance-0.com/CSE5313/CSE5313_L3/)

Use a field to create a new field.

Let $F\subset E$ and $F,E$ are also fields.

#### Theorem for zero in field extension

Suppose $F$ is a field and $f(x)\in F[x]$ is a polynomial with degree $\geq 1$. There is a field extension $E$ of $F$ such that $f(x)$ has a zero in $E$.

<details>
<summary>Proof</summary>

We can assume that $f(x)$ is irreducible. (we can write all the polynomial in $F[x]$ as product of irreducible polynomials.)

Consider the ideal generated by $f(x)$.

Since $f(x)$ is irreducible, $I$ is a maximal ideal in $F[x]$.

We have $F[x]/I$ is a field.

This is a field contain $F$. We have an inclusion map $F\subset F[x]/I$. $a\mapsto a+I$.

Think of $f(x)$ as a polynomial with coefficients in $E(x)$ and evaluate it at $x+I$.

If $f(x)=a_nx^n+a_{n-1}x^{n-1}+\cdots+a_1x+a_0$, then 

$$
\begin{aligned}
f(x+I)&=(a_n+I)(x+I)^n+(a_{n-1}+I)(x+I)^{n-1}+\cdots+(a_1+I)(x+I)+(a_0+I)\\
&=(a_nx^n+I)+(a_{n-1}x^{n-1}+I)+\cdots+(a_1x+I)+(a_0+I)\\
&=(a_nx^n+a_{n-1}x^{n-1}+\cdots+a_1x+a_0)+I\\
&=f(x)+I\\
&=I
\end{aligned}
$$.

Where $I$ is the zero element in $F[x]/I$.

</details>

<details>
<summary>Example</summary>

$f(x)=x^2+1\in \mathbb{R}[x]$ has no zero in $\mathbb{R}$.

Let $I=(x^2+1)\subset \mathbb{R}[x]$.

$I$ is maximal ideal in $\mathbb{R}[x]$, and consider $\mathbb{R}[x]/I$.

$R\to \mathbb{R}[x]/I$. $r\mapsto r+I$.

So that $x+I$ is a zero of $x^2+1\in E[x]$.

---

We claim that $E\simeq \mathbb{C}$.

The isomorphism is given by $\mathbb C\overset{\phi}{\to}\mathbb R/(x^2+1)$, $a+bi\mapsto (a+bx)+I$

$\phi((a+bi)+(a'+bi'))=(a+bx)+(a'+b'x)+I==\phi(a+bi)+\phi(a'+bi')$

$\phi((a+bi)\cdot (a'+bi'))=(a+bx)(a'+bx)+I=(a^2+b^2)+I=\phi(a+bi)+\phi(a'+bi')$

</details>
