# Lecture 10

## Online Algorithms

### Example 1: Elevator

Problem: You've entered the lobby of a tall building, and want to go to the top floor as quickly as possible. There is an elevator which takes $E$ time to get to the top once it arrives. You can also take the stairs which takes $S$ time to climb (once you start) with $S>E$. However, you **do not know** when the elevator will arrive.

#### Offline (Clairvoyant) vs. Online

Offline: If you know that the elevator is arriving in $T$ time, the what will you do?

- Easy. I will computer $E+T$ with $S$ and take the smaller one.

Online: You do not know when the elevator will arrive.

- You can either wait for the elevator or take the stairs.

#### Strategies

**Always take the stairs.**

Your cost $S$, 

Optimal Cost: $E$.

Your cost / Optimal cost = $\frac{S}{E}$.

$S$ would be arbitrary large. For example, the Empire State Building has $103$ floors.

**Wait for the elevator**

Your cost $T+E$

Optimal Cost: $S$ (if $T$ is large)

Your cost / Optimal cost = $\frac{T+E}{S}$.

$T$ could be arbitrary large. For out of service elevator, $T$ could be infinite.

#### Online Algorithms

Definition: An online algorithm must take decisions **without** full information about the problem instance [in this case $T$] and/or it does not know the future [e.g. makes decision immediately as jobs come in without knowing the future jobs].

An **offline algorithm** has the full information about the problem instance.

### Competitive Ratio

Quality of online algorithm is quantified by the **competitive ratio** (Idea is similar to the approximation ratio in optimization).

Consider a problem $L$ (minimization) and let $l$ be an instance of this problem.

$C^*(l)$ is the cost of the optimal offline solution with full information and unlimited computational power.

$A$ is the online algorithm for $L$.

$C_A(l)$ is the value of $A$'s solution on $l$.

An online algorithm $A$ is $\alpha$-competitive if

$$
\frac{C_A(l)}{C^*(l)}\leq \alpha
$$

for all instances $l$ of the problem.

In other words, $\alpha=\max_l\frac{C_A(l)}{C^*(l)}$.

For maximization problems, we want to minimize the comparative ratio.

### Back to the Elevator Problem

**Strategy 1**: Always take the stairs. Ratio is $\frac{S}{E}$. can be arbitrarily large.

**Strategy 2**: Wait for the elevator. Ratio is $\frac{T+E}{S}$. can be arbitrarily large.

**Strategy 3**: We do not make a decision immediately. Let's wait for $R$ times and then takes stairs if elevator does not arrive.

Question: What is the value of $R$? (how long to wait?)

Let's try $R=S$.

Claim: The comparative ratio is $2$.

Proof:

Case 1: The optimal offline solution takes the elevator, then $T+E\leq S$.

We also take the elevator.

Competitive ratio = $\frac{T+E}{T+E}=1$.

Case 2: The optimal offline solution takes the stairs, immediately.

We wait for $R$ times and then take the stairs. In worst case, we wait for $R$ times and then take the stairs for $R$.

Competitive ratio = $\frac{2R}{R}=2$.

EOP

Let's try $R=S-E$ instead.

Claim: The comparative ratio is $max\{1,2-\frac{E}{S}\}$.

Proof:

Case 1: The optimal offline solution takes the elevator, then $T+E\leq S$.

We also take the elevator.

Competitive ratio = $\frac{T+E}{T+E}=1$.

Case 2: The optimal offline solution takes the stairs, immediately.

We wait for $R=S-E$ times and then take the stairs.

Competitive ratio = $\frac{S-E+S}{S}=2-\frac{E}{S}$.

EOP

What if we wait less time? Let's try $R=S-E-\epsilon$ for some $\epsilon>0$

In the worst case, we take the stairs for $S-E-\epsilon$ times and then take the stairs for $S$.

Competitive ratio = $\frac{(S-E-\epsilon)+S}{S-E-\epsilon+E}=\frac{2S-E-\epsilon}{2S-E}>2-\frac{E}{S}$.

So the optimal competitive ratio is $max\{1,2-\frac{E}{S}\}$ when we wait for $S-E$ time.

### Example 2: Cache Replacement

Cache: Data in a cache is organized in blocks (also called pages or cache lines).

If CPU accesses data that is already in the cache, it is called **cache hit**, then access is fast.

If CPU accesses data that is not in the cache, it is called **cache miss**, This block if brought to cache from main memory. If the cache already has $k$ blocks (full), then another block need to be **kicked out** (eviction).

Global: Minimize the number of cache misses.

**Clairvoyant policy**: Knows that will be accessed in the future and the sequence of access.

FIF: Farthest in the future

Example: $k=3$, cache has $3$ blocks.

Sequence: $A B C D C A B$

Cache: $A B C$, the evict $B$ for $D$. then 3 warm up and 1 miss.

Online Algorithm: Least recently used (LRU)

LRU: least recently used.

Example: $A B C D C A B$

Cache: $A B C$, the evict $A$ for $D$. then 3 warm up and 1 miss.

Cache: $D B C$, the evict $B$ for $A$. 1 miss.

Cache: $D A C$, the evict $D$ for $B$. 1 miss.

#### Competitive Ratio for LRU

Claim: LRU is $k+1$-competitive.

Proof:

Split the sequence into subsequences such that each subsequence contains $k+1$ distinct blocks.

For example, suppose $k=3$, sequence $ABCDCEFGEA$, subsequences are $ABCDC$ and $EFGEA$.

LRU Cache: In each subsequence, it has at most $k+1$ misses.

The optimal offline solution: In each subsequence, must have at least $1$ miss.

So the competitive ratio is at most $k+1$.

EOP

Using similar analysis, we can show that LRU is $k$ competitive.

Hint for the proof: 

Split the sequence into subsequences such that each subsequence LRU has $k$ misses.

Argue that OPT has at least $1$ miss in each subsequence.

EOP

#### Many sensible algorithms are $k$-competitive

**Lower Bound**: No deterministic online algorithm is better than $k$-competitive.

**Resource augmentation**: Offline algorithm (which knows the future) has $k$ cache lines in its cache and the online algorithm has $ck$ cache lines with $c>1$.

##### Lemma: Competitive Ratio is $\sim \frac{c}{c-1}$

Say $c=2$. LRU cache has twice as much as cache. LRU is $2$-competitive.

Proof:

LRU has cache of size $2k$.

Divide the sequence into subsequences such that you have $ck$ distinct pages.

In each subsequence, LRU has at most $ck$ misses.

The OPT has at least $(c-1)k$ misses.

So competitive ratio is at most $\frac{ck}{(c-1)k}=\frac{c}{c-1}$.

_Actual competitive ratio is $\sim \frac{c}{c-1+\frac{1}{k}}$._

EOP

### Conclusion

- Definition: some information unknown
- Clairvoyant vs. Online
- Competitive Ratio
- Example:
  - Elevator
  - Cache Replacement

### Example 3: Pessimal cache problem

Maximize number of cache misses.

Maximization problem: competitive ratio is $max\{\frac{\text{cost of the optimal online algorithm}}{\text{cost of our algorithm}}\}$.

Or get $min\{\frac{\text{cost of our algorithm}}{\text{cost of the optimal online algorithm}}\}$.

The size of the cache is $k$.

So if OPT has $X$ cache misses, we want $\geq \frac{X}{\alpha}$. cache misses where $\alpha$ is the competitive ratio.

Claim: The OPT could always miss (note quite) except when the page is accessed twice in a row.

Claim: No deterministic online algorithm has a bounded competitive ratio. (that is independent of the length of the sequence)

Proof:

Start with an empty cache. (size of cache is $k$)

Miss the first $k$ unique pages.

$P_1,P_2,\cdots,P_k|P_{k+1},P_{k+2},\cdots,P_{2k}$

Say your deterministic online algorithm choose to evict $P_i$ for $i\in\{1,2,\cdots,k\}$.

We want to choose $P_i$ for $i\in\{1,2,\cdots,k\}$ such that the number of misses is maximized.

The optimal offline solution: evict the page that will be accessed furthest in the future. Let's call it $\sigma$.

The online algorithm: evict $P_i$ for $i\in\{1,2,\cdots,k\}$. Will have $k+1$ misses in the worst case.

So the competitive ratio is at most $\frac{\sigma}{k+1}$, which is unbounded.

#### Randomized most recently used (RAND, MRU)

MRU without randomization is a deterministic algorithm, and thus, the competitive ration is bounded.

First $k$ unique accesses brings all pages to cache.

On the $k+1$th access, pick a random page from the cache and evict it.

After that evict the MRU no a miss.

Claim: RAND is $k$-competitive.

#### Lemma: After the first $k+1$ unique accesses at all times

1. 1 page is in the cache with probability 1 (the MRU one)
2. There exists $k$ pages each of which is in the cache with probability $1-\frac{1}{k}$
3. All other pages are in the cache with probability $0$.

Proof:

By induction.

Base case: right after the first $k+1$ unique accesses and before $k+2$th access.

1. $P_{k+1}$ is in the cache with probability $1$.
2. When we brought $P_{k+1}$ to the cache, we evicted one page uniformly at random. (i.e. $P_i$ is evicted with probability $\frac{1}{k}$, $P_i$ is still in the cache with probability $1-\frac{1}{k}$)
3. All other $r$ pages are definitely not in the cache because we did not see them yet.

Inductive cases:

Let $P$ be a page that is in the cache with probability $0$

Cache miss and RAND MRU evict $P'$ for another page with probability in this cache with probability $0$.

1. $P$ is in the cache with probability $1$.
2. By induction, there exists a set of $k$ pages each of which is in the cache with probability $1-\frac{1}{k}$.
3. All other pages are in the cache with probability $0$.

Let $P$ be a page in the cache with probability $1-\frac{1}{k}$.

With probability $\frac{1}{k}$, $P$ is not in the cache and RAND evicts $P'$ in the cache and brings $P$ to the cache.

EOP

MRU is $k$-competitive.

Proof:

Case 1: Access MRU page.

Both OPT and our algorithm don't miss.

Case 2: Access some other 1 page

OPT definitely misses.

RAND MRU misses with probability $\geq \frac{1}{k}$.

Let's define the random variable $X$ as the number of misses of RAND MRU.

$E[X]\leq 1+\frac{1}{k}$.

EOP
