# Math 4302 Final Exam Review

## Ring

### Definition of ring

A ring is a set $R$ with binary operation $+$ and $\cdot$ such that:

- $(R,+)$ is an abelian group.
- Multiplication is associative: $(a\cdot b)\cdot c=a\cdot (b\cdot c)$.
- Distribution property: $a\cdot (b+c)=a\cdot b+a\cdot c$, $(b+c)\cdot a=b\cdot a+c\cdot a$. (Note that $\cdot$ may not be abelian, may not even be a group, therefore we need to distribute on both sides.)

> [!NOTE]
>
> $a\cdot b=ab$ will be used for the rest of the sections.

#### Properties of rings

Let $0$ denote the identity of addition of $R$. $-a$ denote the additive inverse of $a$.

- $0\cdot a=a\cdot 0=0$
- $(-a)b=a(-b)=-(ab)$, $\forall a,b\in R$
- $(-a)(-b)=ab$, $\forall a,b\in R$

#### Definition of commutative ring

A ring $(R,+,\cdot)$ is commutative if $a\cdot b=b\cdot a$, $\forall a,b\in R$.

#### Definition of unity element

A ring $R$ has unity element if there is an element $1\in R$ such that $a\cdot 1=1\cdot a=a$, $\forall a\in R$.

#### Definition of unit

Suppose $R$ is a ring with unity element. An element $a\in R$ is called a unit if there is $b\in R$ such that $a\cdot b=b\cdot a=1$.

In this case $b$ is called the inverse of $a$.

#### Definition of division ring

If every $a\neq 0$ in $R$ has a multiplicative inverse (is a unit), then $R$ is called a division ring.

#### Definition of field

A commutative division ring is called a field.

#### Units in $\mathbb{Z}_n$ is coprime to $n$

More generally, $[m]\in \mathbb{Z}_n$ is a unit if and only if $\operatorname{gcd}(m,n)=1$.

### Integral Domains

#### Definition of zero divisors

If $a,b\in R$ with $a,b\neq 0$ and $ab=0$, then $a,b$ are called zero divisors.

#### Zero divisors in $\mathbb{Z}_n$

$[m]\in \mathbb{Z}_n$ is a zero divisor if and only if $\operatorname{gcd}(m,n)>1$ ($m$ is not a unit).

#### Definition of integral domain

A ring $R$ is called an integral domain if every $1\neq 0$ has no zero divisors.

#### Corollaries of integral domain

If $R$ is a integral domain, then we have cancellation property $ab=ac,a\neq 0\implies b=c$.

#### Units with multiplication forms a group

If $R$ is a ring with unity, then the units in $R$ forms a group under multiplication.

### Fermat’s and Euler’s Theorems

#### Fermat’s little theorem

If $p$ is not a divisor of $m$, then $m^{p-1}\equiv 1\mod p$.

#### Corollary of Fermat’s little theorem

If $m\in \mathbb{Z}$, then $m^p\equiv m\mod p$.

#### Euler’s totient function

Consider $\mathbb{Z}_6$, by definition for the group of units, $\mathbb{Z}_6^*=\{1,5\}$.

$$
\phi(n)=|\mathbb{Z}_n^*|=|\{1\leq x\leq n:gcd(x,n)=1\}|
$$

#### Euler’s Theorem

If $m\in \mathbb{Z}$, and $gcd(m,n)=1$, then $m^{\phi(n)}\equiv 1\mod n$.

#### Theorem for existence of solution of modular equations

$ax\equiv b\mod n$ has a solution if and only if $d=\operatorname{gcd}(a,n)|b$ And if there is a solution, then there are exactly $d$ solutions in $\mathbb{Z}_n$.

### Ring homomorphisms

#### Definition of ring homomorphism

Let $R,S$ be two rings, $f:R\to S$ is a ring homomorphism if $\forall a,b\in R$,

- $f(a+b)=f(a)+f(b)\implies f(0)=0, f(-a)=-f(a)$
- $f(ab)=f(a)f(b)$

#### Definition of ring isomorphism

If $f$ is a ring homomorphism and a bijection, then $f$ is called a ring isomorphism.


